README.md, before:

# pygeoapi

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/geopython/pygeoapi.png)](https://travis-ci.org/geopython/pygeoapi)

pygeoapi provides an API to geospatial data

## Installation

```bash
virtualenv -p python pygeoapi
cd pygeoapi
. bin/activate
git clone https://github.com/geopython/pygeoapi.git
cd pygeoapi
pip install -r requirements.txt
pip install -r requirements-dev.txt
# install provider requirements accordingly from requirements-provider.txt
# install starlette requirements accordingly from requirements-starlette.txt
pip install -e .
cp pygeoapi-config.yml local.config.yml
vi local.config.yml
# TODO: what is most important to edit?
export PYGEOAPI_CONFIG=$(pwd)/local.config.yml
# generate OpenAPI Document
pygeoapi generate-openapi-document -c local.config.yml > openapi.yml
export PYGEOAPI_OPENAPI=$(pwd)/openapi.yml
pygeoapi serve
```

## Example requests

Try the swagger ui at `http://localhost:5000/ui`

or

```bash
# feature collection metadata
curl http://localhost:5000/
# conformance
curl http://localhost:5000/conformance
# feature collection
curl http://localhost:5000/collections/countries
# feature collection limit 100
curl http://localhost:5000/collections/countries/items?limit=100
# feature
curl http://localhost:5000/collections/countries/items/1
# number of hits
curl http://localhost:5000/collections/countries/items?resulttype=hits

```

## Exploring with Swagger UI

```bash
docker pull swaggerapi/swagger-ui
docker run -p 80:8080 swaggerapi/swagger-ui
# go to http://localhost
# enter http://localhost:5000/openapi and click 'Explore'
```

## Demo Server

There is a demo server on https://demo.pygeoapi.io running the latest (Docker) version
from the `master` branch of this repo. `pygeoapi` runs there at https://demo.pygeoapi.io/master.

The demo server setup and config is maintained within a seperate GH repo:
https://github.com/geopython/demo.pygeoapi.io.

## Docker

Best/easiest way to run `pygeoapi` is to use Docker.
On DockerHub [pygeoapi Docker Images](https://hub.docker.com/r/geopython/pygeoapi)
are available.

The version tagged `latest` is automatically built whenever code
in the `master` branch of this GitHub repo changes (autobuild).
This also cascades to updating the [pygeoapi demo service](https://demo.pygeoapi.io/master).
So the chain is:

```
 (git push to master) --> (DockerHub Image autobuild) --> (demo server redeploy)

```

Please read the [docker/README](https://github.com/geopython/pygeoapi/blob/master/docker/README.md) for
details of the Docker implementation. To get started quickly
[several examples](https://github.com/geopython/pygeoapi/blob/master/docker/examples) will get you up and running.

### Unit Testing

Unit tests are run using `pytest` from the top project folder:

```
pytest tests
```

NB beware that some tests require Provider dependencies (libraries) to be available
and that the ElasticSearch and Postgres tests require their respective
backend servers running.

Environment variables are set in the file [pytest.ini](pytest.ini).

Commit message:

adds development section to readmme; adds instructions about pre-commit hooks

README.md, after:

# pygeoapi

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/geopython/pygeoapi.png)](https://travis-ci.org/geopython/pygeoapi)

pygeoapi provides an API to geospatial data

## Installation

```bash
virtualenv -p python pygeoapi
cd pygeoapi
. bin/activate
git clone https://github.com/geopython/pygeoapi.git
cd pygeoapi
pip install -r requirements.txt
pip install -r requirements-dev.txt
# install provider requirements accordingly from requirements-provider.txt
# install starlette requirements accordingly from requirements-starlette.txt
pip install -e .
cp pygeoapi-config.yml local.config.yml
vi local.config.yml
# TODO: what is most important to edit?
export PYGEOAPI_CONFIG=$(pwd)/local.config.yml
# generate OpenAPI Document
pygeoapi generate-openapi-document -c local.config.yml > openapi.yml
export PYGEOAPI_OPENAPI=$(pwd)/openapi.yml
pygeoapi serve
```

## Example requests

Try the swagger ui at `http://localhost:5000/ui`

or

```bash
# feature collection metadata
curl http://localhost:5000/
# conformance
curl http://localhost:5000/conformance
# feature collection
curl http://localhost:5000/collections/countries
# feature collection limit 100
curl http://localhost:5000/collections/countries/items?limit=100
# feature
curl http://localhost:5000/collections/countries/items/1
# number of hits
curl http://localhost:5000/collections/countries/items?resulttype=hits

```

## Exploring with Swagger UI

```bash
docker pull swaggerapi/swagger-ui
docker run -p 80:8080 swaggerapi/swagger-ui
# go to http://localhost
# enter http://localhost:5000/openapi and click 'Explore'
```

## Demo Server

There is a demo server on https://demo.pygeoapi.io running the latest (Docker) version
from the `master` branch of this repo. `pygeoapi` runs there at https://demo.pygeoapi.io/master.

The demo server setup and config is maintained within a seperate GH repo:
https://github.com/geopython/demo.pygeoapi.io.

## Docker

Best/easiest way to run `pygeoapi` is to use Docker.
On DockerHub [pygeoapi Docker Images](https://hub.docker.com/r/geopython/pygeoapi)
are available.

The version tagged `latest` is automatically built whenever code
in the `master` branch of this GitHub repo changes (autobuild).
This also cascades to updating the [pygeoapi demo service](https://demo.pygeoapi.io/master).
So the chain is:

```
 (git push to master) --> (DockerHub Image autobuild) --> (demo server redeploy)

```

Please read the [docker/README](https://github.com/geopython/pygeoapi/blob/master/docker/README.md) for
details of the Docker implementation. To get started quickly
[several examples](https://github.com/geopython/pygeoapi/blob/master/docker/examples) will get you up and running.

## Development

### Unit Testing

Unit tests are run using `pytest` from the top project folder:

```sh
pytest tests
```

NB beware that some tests require Provider dependencies (libraries) to be available
and that the ElasticSearch and Postgres tests require their respective
backend servers running.

Running a subset of the tests is possible, e.g.:

```sh
pytest tests/test_api.py`
```

Environment variables are set in the file [pytest.ini](pytest.ini).

### Linting and formatting

[`black`](https://github.com/psf/black) is used for auto-formatting code; [`flake8`](https://pypi.org/project/flake8/) is used to check compliance against [PEP 8](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/). These tools are combined into an automatic workflow with [`pre-commit`](https://pre-commit.com/). When you attempt to commit, pre-commit will first auto-format any Python files that you changed; then it will check PEP 8 compliance. You will have the opportunity to review the automatic changes (since you will need to `git add` them again).

You will need the development dependencies (`requirements-dev.txt`) installed. Then run
```sh
pre-commit install
```
to install the pre-commit hooks into `.git`. Now whenever you commit, these checks will automatically operate.
