docs/source/data-publishing/ogcapi-tiles.rst, before:

.. _ogcapi-tiles:

Publishing map tiles to OGC API - Tiles
=======================================

`OGC API - Tiles`_ provides access to geospatial data in the form of tiles
(map, vector, etc.).

pygeoapi can publish tiles from local or remote data sources (including cloud
object storage or a tile service). To integrate tiles from a local data source, it is assumed
that a directory tree of static tiles has been created on disk.  Examples of
tile generation software include (but are not limited to):

* `MapProxy`_
* `tippecanoe`_

Providers
---------

pygeoapi core tile providers are listed below, along with supported storage types.

.. csv-table::
   :header: Provider, local, remote
   :align: left

   MVT,✅,✅


Below are specific connection examples based on supported providers.

Connection examples
-------------------

MVT
^^^

The MVT provider plugin provides access to `Mapbox Vector Tiles`_.

Remote data sources can be any external service (i.e. Elasticsearch), by providing a URL
template.

.. note::
   Currently, the URL templating in this provider supports the following formats: `/{z}/{x}/{y}` or `/{z}/{y}/{x}`.
   For additional formats: feel free to file an `issue <https://github.com/geopython/pygeoapi/issues>`_.


This code block shows how to configure pygeoapi to read Mapbox vector tiles, from disk or a URL.

.. code-block:: yaml

   providers:
       - type: tile
         name: MVT 
         data: tests/data/tiles/ne_110m_lakes  # local directory tree
         # data: http://localhost:9000/ne_110m_lakes/{z}/{x}/{y}.pbf # tiles stored on a MinIO bucket
         options:
             metadata_format: raw # default | tilejson
             zoom:
                 min: 0
                 max: 5
             schemes:
                 - WorldCRS84Quad
         format:
             name: pbf 
             mimetype: application/vnd.mapbox-vector-tile

This code block shows how to configure pygeoapi to read Mapbox vector tiles, from an Elasticsearch endpoint.

.. code-block:: yaml

   providers:
       - type: tile
         name: MVT 
         data: http://localhost:9200/ne_110m_populated_places_simple2/_mvt/geometry/{z}/{x}/{y}?grid_precision=0
         # if you don't use precision 0, you will be requesting for aggregations which are not supported in the 
         # free version of elastic
         options:
             metadata_format: raw # default | tilejson
             zoom:
                 min: 0
                 max: 5
             schemes:
                 - WorldCRS84Quad
         format:
             name: pbf 
             mimetype: application/vnd.mapbox-vector-tile

Data access examples
--------------------

* list all collections
  * http://localhost:5000/collections
* overview of dataset
  * http://localhost:5000/collections/foo
* overview of dataset tiles
  * http://localhost:5000/collections/foo/tiles
* tile matrix metadata
  * http://localhost:5000/collections/lakes/tiles/WorldCRS84Quad/metadata
* tiles URI template
  * `http://localhost:5000/collections/lakes/tiles/{tileMatrixSetId}/{tileMatrix}/{tileRow}/{tileCol}?f=mvt <http://localhost:5000/collections/lakes/tiles/{tileMatrixSetId}/{tileMatrix}/{tileRow}/{tileCol}?f=mvt>`_


.. _`OGC API - Tiles`: https://github.com/opengeospatial/ogcapi-tiles
.. _`MapProxy`: https://mapproxy.org
.. _`tippecanoe`: https://github.com/mapbox/tippecanoe
.. _`Mapbox Vector Tiles`: https://docs.mapbox.com/vector-tiles/reference

Commit message:

- update docs with example of configuration for rendering pg_tileserv vector tiles (#1058)

docs/source/data-publishing/ogcapi-tiles.rst, after:

.. _ogcapi-tiles:

Publishing map tiles to OGC API - Tiles
=======================================

`OGC API - Tiles`_ provides access to geospatial data in the form of tiles
(map, vector, etc.).

pygeoapi can publish tiles from local or remote data sources (including cloud
object storage or a tile service). To integrate tiles from a local data source, it is assumed
that a directory tree of static tiles has been created on disk.  Examples of
tile generation software include (but are not limited to):

* `MapProxy`_
* `tippecanoe`_

Providers
---------

pygeoapi core tile providers are listed below, along with supported storage types.

.. csv-table::
   :header: Provider, local, remote
   :align: left

   MVT,✅,✅


Below are specific connection examples based on supported providers.

Connection examples
-------------------

MVT
^^^

The MVT provider plugin provides access to `Mapbox Vector Tiles`_.

Remote data sources can be any external service (i.e. Elasticsearch), by providing a URL
template.

.. note::
   Currently, the URL templating in this provider supports the following formats: `/{z}/{x}/{y}` or `/{z}/{y}/{x}`.
   For additional formats: feel free to file an `issue <https://github.com/geopython/pygeoapi/issues>`_.


This code block shows how to configure pygeoapi to read Mapbox vector tiles, from disk or a URL.

.. code-block:: yaml

   providers:
       - type: tile
         name: MVT 
         data: tests/data/tiles/ne_110m_lakes  # local directory tree
         # data: http://localhost:9000/ne_110m_lakes/{z}/{x}/{y}.pbf # tiles stored on a MinIO bucket
         options:
             metadata_format: raw # default | tilejson
             zoom:
                 min: 0
                 max: 5
             schemes:
                 - WorldCRS84Quad
         format:
             name: pbf 
             mimetype: application/vnd.mapbox-vector-tile

This code block shows how to configure pygeoapi to read Mapbox vector tiles, from an `Elasticsearch <https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/search-vector-tile-api.html>`_ endpoint.

.. code-block:: yaml

   providers:
       - type: tile
         name: MVT 
         data: http://localhost:9200/ne_110m_populated_places_simple2/_mvt/geometry/{z}/{x}/{y}?grid_precision=0
         # if you don't use precision 0, you will be requesting for aggregations which are not supported in the 
         # free version of elastic
         options:
             metadata_format: raw # default | tilejson
             zoom:
                 min: 0
                 max: 5
             schemes:
                 - WorldCRS84Quad
         format:
             name: pbf 
             mimetype: application/vnd.mapbox-vector-tile

This code block shows how to configure pygeoapi to read Mapbox vector tiles, from a `pg_tileserv <https://access.crunchydata.com/documentation/pg_tileserv/1.0.8/introduction/>`_ endpoint.

.. code-block:: yaml

        providers:
            - type: tile
              name: MVT
              data: http://localhost:7800/public.ne_50m_admin_0_countries/{z}/{x}/{y}.pbf
              options:
                zoom:
                    min: 0
                    max: 16
                schemes:
                    - WorldCRS84Quad
              format:
                    name: pbf
                    mimetype: application/vnd.mapbox-vector-tile

Data access examples
--------------------

* list all collections
  * http://localhost:5000/collections
* overview of dataset
  * http://localhost:5000/collections/foo
* overview of dataset tiles
  * http://localhost:5000/collections/foo/tiles
* tile matrix metadata
  * http://localhost:5000/collections/lakes/tiles/WorldCRS84Quad/metadata
* tiles URI template
  * `http://localhost:5000/collections/lakes/tiles/{tileMatrixSetId}/{tileMatrix}/{tileRow}/{tileCol}?f=mvt <http://localhost:5000/collections/lakes/tiles/{tileMatrixSetId}/{tileMatrix}/{tileRow}/{tileCol}?f=mvt>`_


.. _`OGC API - Tiles`: https://github.com/opengeospatial/ogcapi-tiles
.. _`MapProxy`: https://mapproxy.org
.. _`tippecanoe`: https://github.com/mapbox/tippecanoe
.. _`Mapbox Vector Tiles`: https://docs.mapbox.com/vector-tiles/reference
