docs/source/data-publishing/ogcapi-edr.rst, before:

.. _ogcapi-edr:

Publishing data to OGC API - Environmental Data Retrieval
=========================================================

The `OGC Environmental Data Retrieval (EDR) (API)`_ provides a family of
lightweight query interfaces to access spatio-temporal data resources.

To add spatio-temporal data to pygeoapi for EDR query interfaces, you
can use the dataset example in :ref:`configuration` as a baseline and
modify accordingly.

Providers
---------

pygeoapi core EDR providers are listed below, along with a matrix of supported query
parameters.

.. csv-table::
   :header: Provider, coords, parameter-name, datetime
   :align: left

   `xarray-edr`_,✅,✅,✅


Below are specific connection examples based on supported providers.

Connection examples
-------------------

xarray-edr
^^^^^^^^^^

.. note::
   Requires Python package xarray

The `xarray-edr`_ provider plugin reads and extracts `NetCDF`_ and `Zarr`_ data via `xarray`_.

.. code-block:: yaml

   providers:
       - type: edr
         name: xarray-edr
         data: tests/data/coads_sst.nc
         # optionally specify x/y/time fields, else provider will attempt
         # to derive automagically
         x_field: lat
         x_field: lon
         time_field: time
         format:
            name: netcdf
            mimetype: application/x-netcdf

   providers:
       - type: edr
         name: xarray-edr
         data: tests/data/analysed_sst.zarr
         format:
            name: zarr
            mimetype: application/zip

.. note::

   `Zarr`_ files are directories with files and subdirectories.  Therefore
   a zip file is returned upon request for said format.

Data access examples
--------------------

* list all collections
  * http://localhost:5000/collections
* overview of dataset
  * http://localhost:5000/collections/foo
* dataset position query
  * http://localhost:5000/collections/foo/position?coords=POINT(-75%2045)
* dataset position query for a specific parameter
  * http://localhost:5000/collections/foo/position?coords=POINT(-75%2045)&parameter-name=SST
* dataset position query for a specific parameter and time step
  * http://localhost:5000/collections/foo/position?coords=POINT(-75%2045)&parameter-name=SST&datetime=2000-01-16


.. _`xarray`: https://docs.xarray.dev/en/stable/
.. _`NetCDF`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NetCDF
.. _`Zarr`: https://zarr.readthedocs.io/en/stable


.. _`OGC Environmental Data Retrieval (EDR) (API)`: https://github.com/opengeospatial/ogcapi-coverages

Commit message:

S3 Cloud Storage Access for EDR Provider (#1235)
* read from s3 bucket

* fix formatting for build workflow

* add s3fs to provider requirements

* storage options for fsspec

* Revert "storage options for fsspec"

This reverts commit dcfaceedd78d0f0e0dc3e38610958671c27b06a6.

* Revert "storage options for fsspec"

This reverts commit dcfaceedd78d0f0e0dc3e38610958671c27b06a6.

* delete extraneous code for cloud storage read

* update documentation

* add ci testing

* update test suite config file

* update number of collections

* update test query for s3

* ci testing updates

* read from s3 bucket

* fix formatting for build workflow

* add s3fs to provider requirements

* storage options for fsspec

* Revert "storage options for fsspec"

This reverts commit dcfaceedd78d0f0e0dc3e38610958671c27b06a6.

* Revert "storage options for fsspec"

This reverts commit dcfaceedd78d0f0e0dc3e38610958671c27b06a6.

* delete extraneous code for cloud storage read

* update documentation

* add ci testing

* update test suite config file

* update number of collections

* update test query for s3

* ci testing updates

* documentation updates

* config updates

* flake8

* modify sfs3 version

installing requirements threw an error when specifying 2023.6.0 (only identifies up through 2023.1.0). Had added the sfs3 requirement to deal with issues thrown when the 2023.9.0 release came out.

* updated coverages documentation

docs/source/data-publishing/ogcapi-edr.rst, after:

.. _ogcapi-edr:

Publishing data to OGC API - Environmental Data Retrieval
=========================================================

The `OGC Environmental Data Retrieval (EDR) (API)`_ provides a family of
lightweight query interfaces to access spatio-temporal data resources.

To add spatio-temporal data to pygeoapi for EDR query interfaces, you
can use the dataset example in :ref:`configuration` as a baseline and
modify accordingly.

Providers
---------

pygeoapi core EDR providers are listed below, along with a matrix of supported query
parameters.

.. csv-table::
   :header: Provider, coords, parameter-name, datetime
   :align: left

   `xarray-edr`_,✅,✅,✅


Below are specific connection examples based on supported providers.

Connection examples
-------------------

xarray-edr
^^^^^^^^^^

.. note::
   Requires Python package xarray

The `xarray-edr`_ provider plugin reads and extracts `NetCDF`_ and `Zarr`_ data via `xarray`_.

.. code-block:: yaml

   providers:
       - type: edr
         name: xarray-edr
         data: tests/data/coads_sst.nc
         # optionally specify x/y/time fields, else provider will attempt
         # to derive automagically
         x_field: lat
         x_field: lon
         time_field: time
         format:
            name: netcdf
            mimetype: application/x-netcdf

   providers:
       - type: edr
         name: xarray-edr
         data: tests/data/analysed_sst.zarr
         format:
            name: zarr
            mimetype: application/zip
    
    providers:
       - type: edr
         name: xarray-edr
         data: s3://power-analysis-ready-datastore/power_901_annual_meteorology_utc.zarr
         format:
            name: zarr
            mimetype: application/zip
         options:
            s3:
               anon: true
               requester_pays: false

.. note::

   `Zarr`_ files are directories with files and subdirectories.  Therefore
   a zip file is returned upon request for said format.

.. note::
   When referencing data stored in an S3 bucket, be sure to provide the full
   S3 URL. Any parameters required to open the dataset using fsspec can be added
   to the config file under `options` and `s3`, as shown above.


Data access examples
--------------------

* list all collections
  * http://localhost:5000/collections
* overview of dataset
  * http://localhost:5000/collections/foo
* dataset position query
  * http://localhost:5000/collections/foo/position?coords=POINT(-75%2045)
* dataset position query for a specific parameter
  * http://localhost:5000/collections/foo/position?coords=POINT(-75%2045)&parameter-name=SST
* dataset position query for a specific parameter and time step
  * http://localhost:5000/collections/foo/position?coords=POINT(-75%2045)&parameter-name=SST&datetime=2000-01-16


.. _`xarray`: https://docs.xarray.dev/en/stable/
.. _`NetCDF`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NetCDF
.. _`Zarr`: https://zarr.readthedocs.io/en/stable


.. _`OGC Environmental Data Retrieval (EDR) (API)`: https://github.com/opengeospatial/ogcapi-coverages
