docs/source/data-publishing/ogcapi-features.rst, before:

.. _ogcapi-features:

Publishing vector data to OGC API - Features
============================================

`OGC API - Features`_ provides geospatial data access functionality to vector data.

To add vector data to pygeoapi, you can use the dataset example in :ref:`configuration`
as a baseline and modify accordingly.

Providers
---------

pygeoapi core feature providers are listed below, along with a matrix of supported query
parameters.

.. csv-table::
   :header: Provider, properties (filters), resulttype, bbox, datetime, sortby, properties (display)
   :align: left

   CSV,❌,results/hits,❌,❌,❌,✅
   Elasticsearch,✅,results/hits,✅,✅,✅,✅
   GeoJSON,❌,results/hits,❌,❌,❌,❌
   MongoDB,✅,results,✅,✅,✅,❌
   OGR,✅,results/hits,✅,❌,❌,❌
   PostgreSQL,✅,results/hits,✅,❌,❌,❌
   SQLiteGPKG,✅,results/hits,✅,❌,❌,❌


Below are specific connection examples based on supported providers.

Connection examples
-------------------

CSV
^^^

To publish a CSV file, the file must have columns for x and y geometry
which need to be specified in ``geometry`` section of the ``provider``
definition.

.. code-block:: yaml

   providers:
       - type: feature
         name: CSV
         data: tests/data/obs.csv
         id_field: id
         geometry:
             x_field: long
             y_field: lat


GeoJSON
^^^^^^^

To publish a GeoJSON file, the file must be a valid GeoJSON FeatureCollection.

.. code-block:: yaml

   providers:
       - type: feature
         name: GeoJSON
         data: tests/data/file.json
         id_field: id


Elasticsearch
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. note::
   Elasticsearch 7 or greater is supported.


To publish an Elasticsearch index, the following are required in your index:

- indexes must be documents of valid GeoJSON Features
- index mappings must define the GeoJSON ``geometry`` as a ``geo_shape``

.. code-block:: yaml

   providers:
       - type: feature
         name: Elasticsearch
         data: http://localhost:9200/ne_110m_populated_places_simple
         id_field: geonameid
         time_field: datetimefield

OGR
^^^

`GDAL/OGR <https://gdal.org>`_ supports a wide range of spatial file formats, such as shapefile, dxf, gpx, kml,  
but also services such as WFS. Read the full list and configuration options at https://gdal.org/drivers/vector.
Additional formats and features are available via the `virtual format <https://gdal.org/drivers/vector/vrt.html#vector-vrt>`_, 
use this driver for example for flat database files (CSV).

The OGR provider requires a recent (3+) version of GDAL to be installed.

.. code-block:: yaml

    providers:
        - type: feature
          name: OGR
          data:
            source_type: ESRI Shapefile
            source: tests/data/dutch_addresses_shape_4326/inspireadressen.shp
            source_options:
              ADJUST_GEOM_TYPE: FIRST_SHAPE
            gdal_ogr_options:
              SHPT: POINT
          id_field: fid
          layer: inspireadressen


.. code-block:: yaml

    providers:
        - type: feature
          name: OGR
          data:
            source_type: WFS
            source: WFS:https://geodata.nationaalgeoregister.nl/rdinfo/wfs?
            source_options:
                VERSION: 2.0.0
                OGR_WFS_PAGING_ALLOWED: YES
                OGR_WFS_LOAD_MULTIPLE_LAYER_DEFN: NO
             gdal_ogr_options:
                GDAL_CACHEMAX: 64
                GDAL_HTTP_PROXY: (optional proxy)
                GDAL_PROXY_AUTH: (optional auth for remote WFS)
                CPL_DEBUG: NO
          id_field: gml_id
          layer: rdinfo:stations


MongoDB
^^^^^^^

.. todo:: add overview and requirements

.. code-block:: yaml

   providers:
       - type: feature
         name: MongoDB
         data: mongodb://localhost:27017/testdb
         collection: testplaces


PostgreSQL
^^^^^^^^^^

.. todo:: add overview and requirements

.. code-block:: yaml

   providers:
       - type: feature
         name: PostgreSQL
         data:
             host: 127.0.0.1
             dbname: test
             user: postgres
             password: postgres
             search_path: [osm, public]
         id_field: osm_id
         table: hotosm_bdi_waterways
         geom_field: foo_geom


SQLiteGPKG
^^^^^^^^^^

.. todo:: add overview and requirements

SQLite file:

.. code-block:: yaml

   providers:
       - type: feature
         name: SQLiteGPKG
         data: ./tests/data/ne_110m_admin_0_countries.sqlite
         id_field: ogc_fid
         table: ne_110m_admin_0_countries


GeoPackage file:

.. code-block:: yaml

   providers:
       - type: feature
         name: SQLiteGPKG
         data: ./tests/data/poi_portugal.gpkg
         id_field: osm_id
         table: poi_portugal


Data access examples
--------------------

- list all collections
  - http://localhost:5000/collections
- overview of dataset
  - http://localhost:5000/collections/foo
- queryables
  - http://localhost:5000/collections/foo/queryables
- browse features
  - http://localhost:5000/collections/foo/items
- paging
  - http://localhost:5000/collections/foo/items?startIndex=10&limit=10
- CSV outputs
  - http://localhost:5000/collections/foo/items?f=csv
- query features (spatial)
  - http://localhost:5000/collections/foo/items?bbox=-180,-90,180,90
- query features (attribute)
  - http://localhost:5000/collections/foo/items?propertyname=foo
- query features (temporal)
  - http://localhost:5000/collections/foo/items?datetime=2020-04-10T14:11:00Z
- query features (temporal) and sort ascending by a property (if no +/- indicated, + is assumed)
  - http://localhost:5000/collections/foo/items?datetime=2020-04-10T14:11:00Z&sortby=+datetime
- query features (temporal) and sort descending by a property
  - http://localhost:5000/collections/foo/items?datetime=2020-04-10T14:11:00Z&sortby=-datetime
- fetch a specific feature
  - http://localhost:5000/collections/foo/items/123

.. _`OGC API - Features`: https://www.ogc.org/standards/ogcapi-features

Commit message:

add pytest for sta provider

docs/source/data-publishing/ogcapi-features.rst, after:

.. _ogcapi-features:

Publishing vector data to OGC API - Features
============================================

`OGC API - Features`_ provides geospatial data access functionality to vector data.

To add vector data to pygeoapi, you can use the dataset example in :ref:`configuration`
as a baseline and modify accordingly.

Providers
---------

pygeoapi core feature providers are listed below, along with a matrix of supported query
parameters.

.. csv-table::
   :header: Provider, properties (filters), resulttype, bbox, datetime, sortby, properties (display)
   :align: left

   CSV,❌,results/hits,❌,❌,❌,✅
   Elasticsearch,✅,results/hits,✅,✅,✅,✅
   GeoJSON,❌,results/hits,❌,❌,❌,❌
   MongoDB,✅,results,✅,✅,✅,❌
   OGR,✅,results/hits,✅,❌,❌,❌
   PostgreSQL,✅,results/hits,✅,❌,❌,❌
   SQLiteGPKG,✅,results/hits,✅,❌,❌,❌
   SensorThingsAPI,✅,results/hits,✅,✅,✅,✅


Below are specific connection examples based on supported providers.

Connection examples
-------------------

CSV
^^^

To publish a CSV file, the file must have columns for x and y geometry
which need to be specified in ``geometry`` section of the ``provider``
definition.

.. code-block:: yaml

   providers:
       - type: feature
         name: CSV
         data: tests/data/obs.csv
         id_field: id
         geometry:
             x_field: long
             y_field: lat


GeoJSON
^^^^^^^

To publish a GeoJSON file, the file must be a valid GeoJSON FeatureCollection.

.. code-block:: yaml

   providers:
       - type: feature
         name: GeoJSON
         data: tests/data/file.json
         id_field: id


Elasticsearch
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. note::
   Elasticsearch 7 or greater is supported.


To publish an Elasticsearch index, the following are required in your index:

- indexes must be documents of valid GeoJSON Features
- index mappings must define the GeoJSON ``geometry`` as a ``geo_shape``

.. code-block:: yaml

   providers:
       - type: feature
         name: Elasticsearch
         data: http://localhost:9200/ne_110m_populated_places_simple
         id_field: geonameid
         time_field: datetimefield

OGR
^^^

`GDAL/OGR <https://gdal.org>`_ supports a wide range of spatial file formats, such as shapefile, dxf, gpx, kml,  
but also services such as WFS. Read the full list and configuration options at https://gdal.org/drivers/vector.
Additional formats and features are available via the `virtual format <https://gdal.org/drivers/vector/vrt.html#vector-vrt>`_, 
use this driver for example for flat database files (CSV).

The OGR provider requires a recent (3+) version of GDAL to be installed.

.. code-block:: yaml

    providers:
        - type: feature
          name: OGR
          data:
            source_type: ESRI Shapefile
            source: tests/data/dutch_addresses_shape_4326/inspireadressen.shp
            source_options:
              ADJUST_GEOM_TYPE: FIRST_SHAPE
            gdal_ogr_options:
              SHPT: POINT
          id_field: fid
          layer: inspireadressen


.. code-block:: yaml

    providers:
        - type: feature
          name: OGR
          data:
            source_type: WFS
            source: WFS:https://geodata.nationaalgeoregister.nl/rdinfo/wfs?
            source_options:
                VERSION: 2.0.0
                OGR_WFS_PAGING_ALLOWED: YES
                OGR_WFS_LOAD_MULTIPLE_LAYER_DEFN: NO
             gdal_ogr_options:
                GDAL_CACHEMAX: 64
                GDAL_HTTP_PROXY: (optional proxy)
                GDAL_PROXY_AUTH: (optional auth for remote WFS)
                CPL_DEBUG: NO
          id_field: gml_id
          layer: rdinfo:stations


MongoDB
^^^^^^^

.. todo:: add overview and requirements

.. code-block:: yaml

   providers:
       - type: feature
         name: MongoDB
         data: mongodb://localhost:27017/testdb
         collection: testplaces


PostgreSQL
^^^^^^^^^^

.. todo:: add overview and requirements

.. code-block:: yaml

   providers:
       - type: feature
         name: PostgreSQL
         data:
             host: 127.0.0.1
             dbname: test
             user: postgres
             password: postgres
             search_path: [osm, public]
         id_field: osm_id
         table: hotosm_bdi_waterways
         geom_field: foo_geom


SQLiteGPKG
^^^^^^^^^^

.. todo:: add overview and requirements

SQLite file:

.. code-block:: yaml

   providers:
       - type: feature
         name: SQLiteGPKG
         data: ./tests/data/ne_110m_admin_0_countries.sqlite
         id_field: ogc_fid
         table: ne_110m_admin_0_countries


GeoPackage file:

.. code-block:: yaml

   providers:
       - type: feature
         name: SQLiteGPKG
         data: ./tests/data/poi_portugal.gpkg
         id_field: osm_id
         table: poi_portugal


SensorThings API
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Sensorthings API (STA) provider is capable of creating collections for the STA entities: 
`Things`, `Datastreams`, and `Observations`. Each entity expands all STA entites 
within a first degree relationship to itself; A pygeoapi configuration with all three entities represents 
an entire STA endpoint. If intralink is `true`, the relationship between each entity will output as a 
link within pygeoapi to the other entity collection. Futhermore, if uri_field is specified 
(Observations cannot have a uri), it will overwrite the intra-pygeoapi link to the other entity.

.. code-block:: yaml

   providers:
       - type: feature
         name: Sensorthings
         data: https://sensorthings-wq.brgm-rec.fr/FROST-Server/v1.0/
         id_field: '@iot.id'
         entity: Datastreams 
         time_field: phenomenonTime
         intralink: true


Data access examples
--------------------

- list all collections
  - http://localhost:5000/collections
- overview of dataset
  - http://localhost:5000/collections/foo
- queryables
  - http://localhost:5000/collections/foo/queryables
- browse features
  - http://localhost:5000/collections/foo/items
- paging
  - http://localhost:5000/collections/foo/items?startIndex=10&limit=10
- CSV outputs
  - http://localhost:5000/collections/foo/items?f=csv
- query features (spatial)
  - http://localhost:5000/collections/foo/items?bbox=-180,-90,180,90
- query features (attribute)
  - http://localhost:5000/collections/foo/items?propertyname=foo
- query features (temporal)
  - http://localhost:5000/collections/foo/items?datetime=2020-04-10T14:11:00Z
- query features (temporal) and sort ascending by a property (if no +/- indicated, + is assumed)
  - http://localhost:5000/collections/foo/items?datetime=2020-04-10T14:11:00Z&sortby=+datetime
- query features (temporal) and sort descending by a property
  - http://localhost:5000/collections/foo/items?datetime=2020-04-10T14:11:00Z&sortby=-datetime
- fetch a specific feature
  - http://localhost:5000/collections/foo/items/123

.. _`OGC API - Features`: https://www.ogc.org/standards/ogcapi-features
