docs/source/install.rst, before:

.. _install:

Install
=======

pygeoapi is nativally run as a Flask app (the code struct is an API and Flask is used as a wrapper). 

pygeoapi uses two configuration files: **pygeoapi-config.yml** and **openapi.yml**. First configuration contains all the information and setup to run pygeoapi while the second is exclusivally for the openapi.

pygeoapi requires setting ``PYGEOAPI_CONFIG`` and  ``PYGEOAPI_OPENAPI`` env variable.   ``PYGEOAPI_CONFIG`` points to the yaml file containing the configuration, in the example
bellow we copy the ``local.config.yml`` default configuration to ``pygeoapi-config.yml`` and use this configuration file. 

``PYGEOAPI_OPENAPI`` variable is the path to openapi file configuration, this file **needs to be autogenerated** using the  ``pygeoapi generate-openapi-document`` command and 
the pygeoapi config files e.g:  ``pygeoapi generate-openapi-document -c local.config.yml > openapi.yml``. And then setting the env variable to the path: 
``export PYGEOAPI_OPENAPI=/path/to/openapi.yml``

For production environments it is recommended to use :ref:`docker` or a specialized WSGI  HTTP server :ref:`wsgi` 

Copy/paste install
------------------

It is advisable to run pygeoapi inside an isolated enviroment either *virtualenv* or *docker*, mainly to avoid python package conflicts.

.. code-block:: console

	#create virtualenv
	virtualenv -p python pygeoapi
	cd pygeoapi
	. bin/activate
	git clone https://github.com/geopython/pygeoapi.git
	cd pygeoapi
	
	#install requirements
	pip install -r requirements.txt
	pip install -r requirements-dev.txt
	
	# install source in current directory
	pip install -e .
	cp pygeoapi-config.yml local.config.yml
	#edit configuration file
	nano  local.config.yml

	export PYGEOAPI_CONFIG=/path/to/local.config.yml
	# generate OpenAPI Document
	pygeoapi generate-openapi-document -c local.config.yml > openapi.yml
	export PYGEOAPI_OPENAPI=/path/to/openapi.yml
	
	#Run pygeoapi
	pygeoapi serve


If the default configuration was used then we should have pygeoapi running on 

.. image:: /_static/openapi_intro_page.png

Commit message:

Add support for starlette
Add api route


Add conformance route


Add route for collections


Fix flake8 errors


Add route for collection items


Add route for processes


Add docs for starlette

docs/source/install.rst, after:

.. _install:

Install
=======

pygeoapi, by default, is natively run as a Flask app (the code struct is an API and Flask is used as a wrapper). Optionally it can be run as a Starlette app.

pygeoapi uses two configuration files: **pygeoapi-config.yml** and **openapi.yml**. First configuration contains all the information and setup to run pygeoapi while the second is exclusivally for the openapi.

pygeoapi requires setting ``PYGEOAPI_CONFIG`` and  ``PYGEOAPI_OPENAPI`` env variable.   ``PYGEOAPI_CONFIG`` points to the yaml file containing the configuration, in the example
bellow we copy the ``local.config.yml`` default configuration to ``pygeoapi-config.yml`` and use this configuration file. 

``PYGEOAPI_OPENAPI`` variable is the path to openapi file configuration, this file **needs to be autogenerated** using the  ``pygeoapi generate-openapi-document`` command and 
the pygeoapi config files e.g:  ``pygeoapi generate-openapi-document -c local.config.yml > openapi.yml``. And then setting the env variable to the path: 
``export PYGEOAPI_OPENAPI=/path/to/openapi.yml``

For production environments it is recommended to use :ref:`docker` or a specialized WSGI  HTTP server :ref:`wsgi` 

Copy/paste install
------------------

It is advisable to run pygeoapi inside an isolated enviroment either *virtualenv* or *docker*, mainly to avoid python package conflicts.

.. code-block:: console

	#create virtualenv
	virtualenv -p python pygeoapi
	cd pygeoapi
	. bin/activate
	git clone https://github.com/geopython/pygeoapi.git
	cd pygeoapi

	#install requirements
	pip install -r requirements.txt
	pip install -r requirements-dev.txt

	# install source in current directory
	pip install -e .
	cp pygeoapi-config.yml local.config.yml
	#edit configuration file
	nano  local.config.yml

	export PYGEOAPI_CONFIG=/path/to/local.config.yml
	# generate OpenAPI Document
	pygeoapi generate-openapi-document -c local.config.yml > openapi.yml
	export PYGEOAPI_OPENAPI=/path/to/openapi.yml

	#Run pygeoapi
	pygeoapi serve --flask


If the default configuration was used then we should have pygeoapi running on 

.. image:: /_static/openapi_intro_page.png
