docs/source/running-with-docker.rst, before:

.. _running-with-docker:

Docker
======

pygeoapi provides an official `Docker`_ image which is made available on the `geopython Docker Hub`_.  Additional
Docker examples can be found in the `pygeoapi GitHub repository`_, each with sample configurations, test data,
deployment scenarios and provider backends.

The `pygeoapi demo server`_ runs various services from Docker images which also serve as `useful examples`_.

.. note::
   Both Docker and `Docker Compose`_ are required on your system to run pygeoapi images.

The basics
----------

The official pygeoapi Docker image will start a pygeoapi Docker container using Gunicorn on internal port 80.

To run with the default built-in configuration and data:

.. code-block:: bash

   docker run -p 5000:80 -it geopython/pygeoapi run
   # or simply
   docker run -p 5000:80 -it geopython/pygeoapi

...then browse to http://localhost:5000

You can also run all unit tests to verify:

.. code-block:: bash

   docker run -it geopython/pygeoapi test


Overriding the default configuration
------------------------------------

Normally you would override the ``default.config.yml`` with your own ``pygeoapi`` configuration.
This can be done via Docker Volume Mapping.

For example, if your config is in ``my.config.yml``:

.. code-block:: bash

   docker run -p 5000:80 -v $(pwd)/my.config.yml:/pygeoapi/local.config.yml -it geopython/pygeoapi


For a cleaner approach, You can use ``docker-compose`` as per below:

.. code-block:: yaml

   version: "3"
   services:
     pygeoapi:
       image: geopython/pygeoapi:latest
       volumes:
         - ./my.config.yml:/pygeoapi/local.config.yml
       ports:
         - "5000:80"

Or you can create a ``Dockerfile`` extending the base image and **copy** in your configuration:

.. code-block:: dockerfile

   FROM geopython/pygeoapi:latest
   COPY ./my.config.yml /pygeoapi/local.config.yml

A corresponding example can be found in https://github.com/geopython/demo.pygeoapi.io/tree/master/services/pygeoapi_master

Deploying on a sub-path
-----------------------

By default the ``pygeoapi`` Docker image will run from the ``root`` path (``/``).  If you need to run from a
sub-path and have all internal URLs properly configured, you can set the ``SCRIPT_NAME`` environment variable.

For example to run with ``my.config.yml`` on ``http://localhost:5000/mypygeoapi``:

.. code-block:: bash

   docker run -p 5000:80 -e SCRIPT_NAME='/mypygeoapi' -v $(pwd)/my.config.yml:/pygeoapi/local.config.yml -it geopython/pygeoapi


...then browse to **http://localhost:5000/mypygeoapi**

Below is a corresponding ``docker-compose`` approach:

.. code-block:: yaml

   version: "3"
   services:
     pygeoapi:
       image: geopython/pygeoapi:latest
       volumes:
         - ./my.config.yml:/pygeoapi/local.config.yml
       ports:
         - "5000:80"
       environment:
        - SCRIPT_NAME=/pygeoapi

A corresponding example can be found in https://github.com/geopython/demo.pygeoapi.io/tree/master/services/pygeoapi_master

Summary
-------

Docker is an easy and reproducible approach to deploying systems.

.. note::
   Additional approaches are welcome and encouraged; see :ref:`contributing` for more information on
   how to contribute to and improve the documentation


.. _`Docker`: https://www.docker.com
.. _`geopython Docker Hub`: https://hub.docker.com/r/geopython/pygeoapi
.. _`pygeoapi GitHub repository`: https://github.com/geopython/pygeoapi
.. _`pygeoapi demo server`: https://demo.pygeoapi.io
.. _`useful examples`: https://github.com/geopython/demo.pygeoapi.io/tree/master/services
.. _`Docker Compose`: https://docs.docker.com/compose/

Commit message:

PR #801 for #989: GH Workflow - Docker Build+Push to DockerHub and GH Container Registry
* Create ghcr.yml

Create and publish a Docker image to GitHub Container Registry

* Update installation.rst

Add reference to GitHub Container registry

* Update running-with-docker.rst

Add ghcr references

* Make ghcr conditional on main.yml

Updated main.yml run conditions & add on-success condition to ghcr.yml

* Miss aligned

* change workflow name

GHCR

* Update build to Build

Names didn't match GHCR condition

* Remove cog symbol from Build name

* Add paths-ignore

**.md

* Added build & push to DockerHub

* Add authorship & update header

* Tidy yml, add on-success condition

* Add on failure condition

* Remove GHC Tests and Conditional Push

* DockerHub Test - koalageo/pygeoapi

* DockerHub - Revert to geopython/pygeoapi

* Use SECRET for DockerHub repo

* Combined Build & Push

* Update tag function

* Fix tags for latest

* Lastest tag only on `master`

* Use tag on push tag event

* Add latest tag on default branch

* Add unit tests step

* Add separate build & test steps

* Typo in docs

* Move flake8 to before tests - catch errors early

* Add further tags

Co-authored-by: Benjamin Webb <40066515+webb-ben@users.noreply.github.com>

Co-authored-by: Benjamin Webb <40066515+webb-ben@users.noreply.github.com>

docs/source/running-with-docker.rst, after:

.. _running-with-docker:

Docker
======

pygeoapi provides an official `Docker`_ image which is made available on both the `geopython Docker Hub`_ and our `GitHub Container Registry`_.  Additional
Docker examples can be found in the `pygeoapi GitHub repository`_, each with sample configurations, test data,
deployment scenarios and provider backends.

The `pygeoapi demo server`_ runs various services from Docker images which also serve as `useful examples`_.

.. note::
   Both Docker and `Docker Compose`_ are required on your system to run pygeoapi images.

The basics
----------

The official pygeoapi Docker image will start a pygeoapi Docker container using Gunicorn on internal port 80.

Either ``IMAGE`` can be called with the ``docker`` command, ``geopython/pygeoapi`` from DockerHub or ``ghcr.io/geophython/pygeoapi`` from the GitHub Container Registry. Examples below use ``geopython/pygeoapi``. 

To run with the default built-in configuration and data:

.. code-block:: bash

   docker run -p 5000:80 -it geopython/pygeoapi run
   # or simply
   docker run -p 5000:80 -it geopython/pygeoapi

...then browse to http://localhost:5000

You can also run all unit tests to verify:

.. code-block:: bash

   docker run -it geopython/pygeoapi test


Overriding the default configuration
------------------------------------

Normally you would override the ``default.config.yml`` with your own ``pygeoapi`` configuration.
This can be done via Docker Volume Mapping.

For example, if your config is in ``my.config.yml``:

.. code-block:: bash

   docker run -p 5000:80 -v $(pwd)/my.config.yml:/pygeoapi/local.config.yml -it geopython/pygeoapi


For a cleaner approach, You can use ``docker-compose`` as per below:

.. code-block:: yaml

   version: "3"
   services:
     pygeoapi:
       image: geopython/pygeoapi:latest
       volumes:
         - ./my.config.yml:/pygeoapi/local.config.yml
       ports:
         - "5000:80"

Or you can create a ``Dockerfile`` extending the base image and **copy** in your configuration:

.. code-block:: dockerfile

   FROM geopython/pygeoapi:latest
   COPY ./my.config.yml /pygeoapi/local.config.yml

A corresponding example can be found in https://github.com/geopython/demo.pygeoapi.io/tree/master/services/pygeoapi_master

Deploying on a sub-path
-----------------------

By default the ``pygeoapi`` Docker image will run from the ``root`` path (``/``).  If you need to run from a
sub-path and have all internal URLs properly configured, you can set the ``SCRIPT_NAME`` environment variable.

For example to run with ``my.config.yml`` on ``http://localhost:5000/mypygeoapi``:

.. code-block:: bash

   docker run -p 5000:80 -e SCRIPT_NAME='/mypygeoapi' -v $(pwd)/my.config.yml:/pygeoapi/local.config.yml -it geopython/pygeoapi


...then browse to **http://localhost:5000/mypygeoapi**

Below is a corresponding ``docker-compose`` approach:

.. code-block:: yaml

   version: "3"
   services:
     pygeoapi:
       image: geopython/pygeoapi:latest
       volumes:
         - ./my.config.yml:/pygeoapi/local.config.yml
       ports:
         - "5000:80"
       environment:
        - SCRIPT_NAME=/pygeoapi

A corresponding example can be found in https://github.com/geopython/demo.pygeoapi.io/tree/master/services/pygeoapi_master

Summary
-------

Docker is an easy and reproducible approach to deploying systems.

.. note::
   Additional approaches are welcome and encouraged; see :ref:`contributing` for more information on
   how to contribute to and improve the documentation


.. _`Docker`: https://www.docker.com
.. _`geopython Docker Hub`: https://hub.docker.com/r/geopython/pygeoapi
.. _`GitHub Container Registry`: https://github.com/geopython/pygeoapi/pkgs/container/pygeoapi
.. _`pygeoapi GitHub repository`: https://github.com/geopython/pygeoapi
.. _`pygeoapi demo server`: https://demo.pygeoapi.io
.. _`useful examples`: https://github.com/geopython/demo.pygeoapi.io/tree/master/services
.. _`Docker Compose`: https://docs.docker.com/compose/
